# sql-server-AWS-setup-guide-
A collection of tips I learned the hard way to successfully connecting to a Sql Server instance using Python

I recently went through the experience of setting up and connecting to a sql server database instance hosted by Amazon Web Service’ Relational Database Service. While the actual instance setup via the AWS dashboard was fairly straightforward, connecting to it via Python was less so and I ended up running into several pitfalls along the way. It is my intention to therefore document those pitfalls and how I got past them here in one place in the hopes that this may save someone else some headache in the future. 

## Setup

The first step to creating a usable database is the actual instantiation of the database server that can be used by whatever user base will actually be making queries at the end of this process. Amazon has a fairly easy to use dashboard system set up to do this, but there are a couple of things to keep in mind when going through this process. 

For my instance I used the free tier of services, which meant using SQL Server Express Edition. I was able to do this because the needs dictated by my use case were not extravagant enough to require anything beyond what the basic tier provided. 

For billing purposes I will note that the free tier instance does allot up to 750 hours of uptime per month; which basically entails having one instance up and running for the entire month 24/7. If you plan on using more than one database instance, even at the free tier, you will be charged if you keep one running for the entire month and instantiate additional instances. While the rate per hour after this limit is less than a cent per hour, if your needs allow for database downtime, a good way to save unnecessary billing is to take a snapshot of your instance before deactivating it between use periods and then firing up a new instance from the snapshot when needed. This allows you to recreate the original database from the copy without having to rebuild any tables or reinsert any data contained therein. 

During instantiation, for the most part, I accepted the default options. There are a couple of things to note here. I did use the default subnet, which is the default VPC that Amazon provides you with when you start an AWS account, however I did create a custom security group specifically for SQL database hosting. If you do not do this, you will have to make the following modifications to your existing security group. First make sure that port 1433 is open in inbound settings; this is the port that SQL Server specifically uses, other iterations of SQL use different ports (Postgresql uses port 5432 for example), but without this open you will not be able to access your server. Also if you want to make your server accessible to others, make sure that your inbound TCP rules include permissions for sources 0.0.0.0/0 and ::/0, otherwise the default permission is specific to your address which just allows you to access it outside of your virtual private cloud. This gives your server permission to receive requests from anyone who has the proper credentials. Which brings me to the second change that I made, which was to allow public access. This fit my use case as I wanted to share access with specific users, and for me it was easier to provide those users with the proper username, password and address to the server than to set up access to my vpc network through IAM roles, however this may be a step to look into if your use case entails providing access to many users within your organization at different points in time. 

The last thing to note here during the instantiation process is to make sure you save your master username, master password and database instance name; without these you will not be able to connect to your instance and as the process will remind you, there is no way to go back and get this information later beyond a certain point. 
